Independence Day Speech
My Namaskar/greetings to one and all gathered here on this auspicious morning as we become
part of the great celebration of Independence of our country. Hon’ble Pro-Vice Chancellor of
RGU, Prof. Amitava Mitra, Registrar, Prof. Tomo Riba, Finance Officer, Prof. Otem Padung, CoE,
Dr. N. T. Jose, Joint Registrar, Dr. David Pertin, Deputy Registrars, Deans, Heads, Teachers, other
officials, academic and administrative staff, support staff, workers, dear children and campus
dwellers. Today we celebrate the 74th Independence Day of our nation. It was on this historic
day in 1947 that the first Prime Minister of India, Pt. Jawaharlal Nehru unfurled the tri-colour
atop the Red Fort in Delhi to mark the freedom of India from colonial rule of the British
Government.
15th August is also an occasion for us to remember the contributions made by our freedom
fighters for the independence of our country and re-dedicate ourselves to the service of our
nation. Today, we remember and pay homage to the sacrifices made by the leaders and
warriors who fought for the independence of India. They sacrificed their sweat and blood so
that we and our future generations may breathe the air of independence free from the yoke of
foreign colonial oppression. It is a day to pay homage to each and everyone who participated in
freedom struggle. We should remember not just the leaders whose names appear in history
lessons but also the common people who participated in the struggle at the grass-root level to
shake the foundations of the mighty British Empire. Everyone who participated in the freedom
struggle to one’s capacity is a hero or a heroine worthy to be remembered, celebrated and paid
homage.
At this juncture, let us take a moment to remember the sacrifices made by the doctors, nurses,
paramedics and health workers who are today putting their lives at risk to give us freedom from
the Virus that has taken the world in its grip. Many have lost their lives in the line of duty and
the nation must recognize their sacrifice in a fitting manner. Arunachal Pradesh has also had
her fair share of participation in the freedom struggle of the country. Her worthy children have
always stood at the forefront in the face of any danger, whether it has been the invasion of
foreigners or the fight against Covid.
15th August is a time for re-dedicating ourselves to the cause of the society and the nation. It is
a day to re-affirm our oath of taking India to the greater heights to which she rightfully belongs.
Just as we have shown great determination and unity in battling the dreaded Covid-19 virus by
obeying the SOPs put into effect by the Government and medical authorities from time to time,
let us dedicate ourselves to fight the other viruses rampant around us that make the society
and the nation sick – the viruses of terrorism, nepotism, corruption, laziness, communalism and
narrow regionalism and let us stand for unity. Let us first and foremost be Indians – beyond the
narrow boundaries of language, community, region and religion. Let us preserve our
uniqueness but also bask in the glory of being Indians. It is only through our collective efforts
that India will turn into the global superpower that we have always dreamed her to be. At a
time as this, when we are faced with external threats like the Chinese attack on our soldiers at
our border, our Unity is the greatest weapon to combat all such threats.
2020 is also a year of change. The announcement of the New Education Policy by the Central
Government is a landmark announcement. The New Educational Policy aims to remove the
loopholes in the current educational policy and move towards Access, Equity, Quality,
Affordability and Accountability in its design to align itself to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable
Development. The aim of NEP 2020 is to bring about the wave of a new self-reliant India – the
Atma Nirbhar Bharat. At the same time it will also turn India into a nation of youths capable of
contributing to all sectors of the nation for an all-round development.
To talk of our University, Rajiv Gandhi University has moved largely towards the online mode in
its activities to keep pace with the demands of the time. We also have to work unitedly for a
better NAAC and NIRF ranking. The proverb ‘Survival of the Fittest’ is a truth and unless we
accept the changes and evolve with the changing times, we will be left out in this race towards
sustenance and development. Our capacity to change and evolve and our efforts towards it is
also a mark of our dedication and contribution to the nation.
India’s journey since the first unfurling of the tri-colour on the 15th of August 1947 atop the Red
Fort till date has been a long and glorious journey. Let us take this occasion today to re-dedicate
ourselves to the cause of the nation and our people and stand united against all obstacles so
that we can materialize that glorious India which we have dreamt of for us and our future
generations. Let us turn India into the global leader in spreading human values and universal
love.
Jai Hind. Jai Arunachal.
Bharat Mata ki Jai. 